Revamp sending-a-message-to-a-service tutorial (#8057)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service.md

    $ bal new sending-a-message-to-a-service
    ```

2. Remove the generated content in the `main.bal` file and open the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/design-the-services/http-api-designer) in VS Code.

    ![Open diagram view](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_open_diagram_view.gif)

3. Define two [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URL of the backend service.

>     ![Define configurable variables](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_define_configurable_variables.gif)

Reviewer: @sm1990 Can we have a directory structure within `/learn/images`? Then we can avoid this kind of file naming.

Author: +1. 

We can have `/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending_a_message_to_a_service/define_configurable_variables.gif`

Reviewer 2: > @sm1990 Can we have a directory structure within `/learn/images`? Then we can avoid this kind of file naming.

@anupama-pathirage yes.
@dulajdilshan you can create a directory [here](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/tree/master/public/learn/images)

    The corresponding source code that is generated is as follows.

    ```ballerina
    configurable int port = 8290;
    configurable string healthcareBackend = "http://localhost:9090/healthcare";
    ```

4. Generate the record corresponding to the payload from the backend service using the "Paste JSON as record" VS Code command by providing a sample of the expected JSON payload.

    ```json
    {
        "name": "thomas collins",
        "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
        "category": "surgery",
        "availability": "9.00 a.m - 11.00 a.m",
        "fee": 7000
    }
    ```

    ![Paste JSON as record](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_paste_json_as_record.gif)
    
    1. Copy the JSON.

>     2. Open VS [Code Command palette](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/userinterface#_command-palette).

Reviewer: Hyperlink the command palette only and P should be in uppercase. 

i.e.

Open VS Code [Command Palette](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/userinterface#_command-palette)

    3. Search and select `Ballerina: Paste JSON as record` command.
    
    > **Note:** You can manually define the record, if there is no sample JSON.
    > 
    > ```ballerina
    > type Doctor record {|
    >     string name;
    >     string hospital;
    >     string category;
    >     string availability;
    >     decimal fee;
    > |};
    > ```

>     The payload will be an array of JSON objects in which, the structure of each JSON object matches this record.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The payload will be an array of JSON objects in which the structure of each JSON object matches this record.
```

>     The payload will be an array of JSON objects in which, the structure of each JSON object matches this record.

Reviewer: Since it says the payload will be an array of JSON objects, isn't it better to use an json array as the sample payload above which was used to paste?

Author: if so, we get something like this 
```
type NewRecordItem record {
    string name;
    string hospital;
    string category;
    string availability;
    int fee;
};

type NewRecord record {
    NewRecordItem[] newRecord;
};
```

But we don't want this `NewRecord`

Reviewer: @MaryamZi / @hevayo Is this a usability improvement for editor?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I think adding the array as a field of another record is not necessary.

I think what's more appropriate here would be generating an array type (if at all).

```ballerina
type NewRecordItem record {
    string name;
    string hospital;
    string category;
    string availability;
    int fee;
};

type NewRecordArray NewRecordItem[];
```

5. Define the [HTTP service (REST API)](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#rest-service) that has the resource that accepts user requests, retrieves relevant details from the backend service, and responds to the request.

    - Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service, which is attached to the listener listening on port `port`.

        ![Define the service](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_define_a_service.gif)

>     - Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on resource path `/querydoctor` and accepts the `category` (corresponding to the specialization) as a path parameter.

Reviewer: IMO, `querydoctor` is not a proper resource name. Best practice is to use nouns instead of verbs for resource function names. So having `doctors` should be enough IMO.

Refer to best practice: https://learn-ballerina.github.io/best_practices/naming_conventions.html#rest-service-and-resource-paths

@MaryamZi wdyt?

Reviewer 3: +1. We've used the same as the WSO2 tutorial, but I agree it needs to change.

Author: +1 for this.

        ![Define the resource](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_define_a_resource.gif)

        The generated service will be as follows.
    
        ```ballerina
        service /healthcare on new http:Listener(port) {
            resource function get querydoctor/[string category]() 
                    returns Doctor[]|http:NotFound|http:InternalServerError {
                
            }
        }
        ```

> 6. Define an [`http:Client` client](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#http-client) to send requests to the backend service.

Reviewer: Repetitive word client 
<img width="658" alt="image" src="https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/assets/16300038/a7b9daf8-b23a-4e59-9149-77095a09317b">

Author: +1

    $ bal new sending-a-message-to-a-service
    ```

2. Remove the generated content in the `main.bal` file and open the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/design-the-services/http-api-designer) in VS Code.

    ![Open diagram view](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_open_diagram_view.gif)

3. Define two [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URL of the backend service.

    ![Define configurable variables](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_define_configurable_variables.gif)

    The corresponding source code that is generated is as follows.

    ```ballerina
    configurable int port = 8290;
    configurable string healthcareBackend = "http://localhost:9090/healthcare";
    ```

4. Generate the record corresponding to the payload from the backend service using the "Paste JSON as record" VS Code command by providing a sample of the expected JSON payload.

>     Sample expected payload (`Doctor`) as JSON:

Reviewer 3: Not required IMO.

    ```json
    {
        "name": "thomas collins",
        "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
        "category": "surgery",
        "availability": "9.00 a.m - 11.00 a.m",
        "fee": 7000
    }
    ```

>     ![Paste JSON as record](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_paste_json_as_record.gif)

Reviewer 3: I would add a new line between the configurable variables and the type after it is generated.

Reviewer 3: Doesn't necessarily have to be in the gif. But would look better for subsequent gifs.

Reviewer 3: Seems like you've done it already in some.

Author: Yeah. It gets reformatted when creating the service.
I thought that having changed code would distract the viewer and doing the reformatting in the gif is also not pleasant.

Reviewer 3: We don't have to show it. But would look better if it is done before we show the service designer steps.

>     1. Copy the JSON with `ctrl+c` or `cmd+c`.

Reviewer 3: Inconsistent capitalization for Ctrl, Cmd.

IMO, just copy is enough. We don't have to say how.

Reviewer 3: Same for the rest.

>     2. Open Command pallette using `Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Cmd+Shift+P`.

Reviewer 3: I would just say "Open the Command palette" and link to official docs for the command palette.

Please check for typos.

    3. Search for `Ballerina: Paste JSON as record` and select it or hit `Enter`.
    
    > **Note:** You can manually define the record, if there is no sample JSON.
    > 
    > ```ballerina
    > type Doctor record {|
    >     string name;
    >     string hospital;
    >     string category;
    >     string availability;
    >     decimal fee;

>     > |};

Reviewer 3: Not necessary? Same as the one generated?

Author: make sense

    $ bal new sending-a-message-to-a-service
    ```

> 2. Remove the generated content in the `main.bal` file and open the [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/design-the-services/http-api-designer) in VS Code.

Reviewer 3: We aren't really using the API designer here, right? What if we combine 2 and 3 and say open the diagram view and add two configurable variables...

Reviewer 3: And mention the HTTP API designer where it is actually used (currently point 5).

Author: I feel like adding "open diagram" in a step would be more make sense because we need a diagram view for every step.

    $ bal new sending-a-message-to-a-service
    ```

> 2. Remove the generated content in the `main.bal` file, open the diagram view in VS Code.

Reviewer 3: Incomplete sentence.

```suggestion
2. Remove the generated content in the `main.bal` file and open the diagram view in VS Code.
```

    ![Open diagram view](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/open_diagram_view.gif)

3. Define two [configurable variables](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#configurability) for the port on which the listener should listen and the URL of the backend service.

    ![Define configurable variables](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/define_configurable_variables.gif)

    The corresponding source code that is generated is as follows.

    ```ballerina
    configurable int port = 8290;
    configurable string healthcareBackend = "http://localhost:9090/healthcare";
    ```

> 4. Generate the record corresponding to the payload from the backend service using the ["Paste JSON as record"](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/references/convert-json-to-records/#via-the-command-palette) VS Code command by providing a sample of the expected JSON payload.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Generate a record type corresponding to the payload from the backend service using the ["Paste JSON as record"](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/references/convert-json-to-records/#via-the-command-palette) VS Code command by providing a sample of the expected JSON payload.
```

    The payload from the backend service will be an array of JSON objects, where each JSON object will be similar to the following.

    ```json
    {
        "name": "thomas collins",
        "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
        "category": "surgery",
        "availability": "9.00 a.m - 11.00 a.m",
        "fee": 7000
    }
    ```

    1. Copy the sample JSON payload.

>     2. Open VS Code [Command Palette](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/userinterface#_command-palette).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    2. Open the VS Code [Command Palette](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/userinterface#_command-palette).
```

>     3. Search and select `Ballerina: Paste JSON as record` command.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    3. Search and select the `Ballerina: Paste JSON as record` command.
```

    ![Paste JSON as record](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/paste_json_as_record.gif)

5. Define the [HTTP service (REST API)](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#rest-service) that has the resource that accepts user requests, retrieves relevant details from the backend service, and responds to the request.

    - Open [Ballerina HTTP API Designer](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/design-the-services/http-api-designer) in VS Code
   
    - Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service, which is attached to the listener listening on port `port`.

        ![Define the service](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/define_a_service.gif)

>     - Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on resource path `/doctors` and accepts the `category` (corresponding to the specialization) as a path parameter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on resource path `/doctors` and accepts the `category` path parameter (corresponding to the specialization).
```

Reviewer 3: Since we are picking the return types in the GIF IMO we should mention it here.

        ![Define the resource](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/define_a_resource.gif)

        The generated service will be as follows.
    
        ```ballerina
        service /healthcare on new http:Listener(port) {
            resource function get doctors/[string category]() 
                    returns Doctor[]|http:NotFound|http:InternalServerError {
                
            }
        }
        ```

> 6. Define an [`http:Client`](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#http-client) to send requests to the backend service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
6. Define an [`http:Client`](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#http-client) object to send requests to the backend service.
```

    ![Define the client](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/define_client_endpoint.gif)

    The generated code will be as follows.

    ```ballerina

>     final http:Client queryDoctorEP = check new (url = healthcareBackend);

Reviewer 3: Let's get rid of the `url = ` part and pass a positional argument here. Let's create a tooling issue for this too.

Author: Doing this in GIFs will distract the viewer from the base idea, hence let's add this to complete source code. WDYT?

    configurable string healthcareBackend = "http://localhost:9090/healthcare";
    ```

4. Generate the record corresponding to the payload from the backend service using the ["Paste JSON as record"](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/references/convert-json-to-records/#via-the-command-palette) VS Code command by providing a sample of the expected JSON payload.

    ```json
    {
        "name": "thomas collins",
        "hospital": "grand oak community hospital",
        "category": "surgery",
        "availability": "9.00 a.m - 11.00 a.m",
        "fee": 7000
    }
    ```

    1. Copy the JSON.
    2. Open VS Code [Command Palette](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/getstarted/userinterface#_command-palette).
    3. Search and select `Ballerina: Paste JSON as record` command.

    ![Paste JSON as record](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_paste_json_as_record.gif)
    
    > **Note:** You can manually define the record, if there is no sample JSON.
    > 
    > ```ballerina
    > type Doctor record {|
    >     string name;
    >     string hospital;
    >     string category;
    >     string availability;
    >     decimal fee;

>     > |};

Reviewer 3: On further thought, we probably don't need this.

    > ```

    The payload will be an array of JSON objects in which the structure of each JSON object matches this record.

5. Define the [HTTP service (REST API)](https://ballerina.io/learn/by-example/#rest-service) that has the resource that accepts user requests, retrieves relevant details from the backend service, and responds to the request.

    - Use `/healthcare` as the service path (or the context) of the service, which is attached to the listener listening on port `port`.

        ![Define the service](/learn/images/tutorial_sending_a_message_to_a_service_define_a_service.gif)

>     - Define an HTTP resource that allows the `GET` operation on resource path `/doctors` and accepts the `category` (corresponding to the specialization) as a path parameter.

Reviewer 3: Can't we edit the generated one instead of removing it?

Author: +1

        Doctor[]|http:ClientError resp = queryDoctorEP->/[category];
        ```

>     - Use the `is` check to decide the response based on the response to the client call. If the client call was successful and the respond payload was an array of `Doctor` records (as expected), then directly return the array from the resource. If the request fails, send an `http:NotFound` response if the client call failed with a `4xx` status code or return an `http:InternalServerError` response for other failures.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Use the `is` check to decide the response based on the response to the client call. If the client call was successful and the respond payload was an array of `Doctor` records (as expected), then directly return the array from the resource. If the request fails, send an `http:NotFound` response if the client call failed with a `4xx` status code or send an `http:InternalServerError` response for other failures.
```

        Doctor[]|http:ClientError resp = queryDoctorEP->/[category];
        ```

>     - Use the `is` check to decide the response based on the response to the client call. If the client call was successful and the respond payload was an array of `Doctor` records (as expected), then, directly return the array from the resource. If the request fails, send an `http:NotFound` response if the client call failed with a `4xx` status code or return an `http:InternalServerError` response for other failures.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Use the `is` check to decide the response based on the response to the client call. If the client call was successful and the respond payload was an array of `Doctor` records (as expected), then, directly return the array from the resource. If the request fails and the client call results in a `4xx` status code, send an `http:NotFound` response, or return an `http:InternalServerError` response for other failures.
```

Author: As a second thought, I feel like the previous one sounds understandable. 

@MaryamZi WDYT?

>         ```ballerina

Reviewer: Why having the code here again? Since it is already given at the beginning of step 7, this is duplicated content.

Author: IMO, Doesn't this make the code more understandable by the user?

The [sequence diagram view](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/implement-the-code/sequence-diagram-view/) for the implemented resource method is the following.

<img src="/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/sequence_diagram.png" alt="Sequence Diagram" height="800" style="width:auto; max-width:100%">

### Step 3: Build and run the service

![Run the service](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/run_the_service.gif)

> **Note:**
> Alternatively, you can run this service by navigating to the project root and using the `bal run` command.
>
> ```bash
> sending-a-message-to-a-service$ bal run
> Compiling source
>         integration_tutorials/sending_a_message_to_a_service:0.1.0
>
> Running executable
> ```
>

### Step 4: Try out the use case

Let's test the use case by sending a request to the service.

#### Start the backend service

Download the JAR file for the [backend service](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/blob/main/backends/hospital-service/hospitalservice.jar), and execute the following command to start the service.

```bash
bal run hospitalservice.jar
```

#### Send a request

> ![Send a request](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/try_it.gif)

Reviewer 3: Can we mention something about the try it client here. Basically a simple description of the step.

The [sequence diagram view](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/implement-the-code/sequence-diagram-view/) for the implemented resource method is the following.

<img src="/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/sequence_diagram.png" alt="Sequence Diagram" height="800" style="width:auto; max-width:100%">

### Step 3: Build and run the service

![Run the service](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/run_the_service.gif)

> **Note:**
> Alternatively, you can run this service by navigating to the project root and using the `bal run` command.
>
> ```bash
> sending-a-message-to-a-service$ bal run
> Compiling source
>         integration_tutorials/sending_a_message_to_a_service:0.1.0
>
> Running executable
> ```
>

### Step 4: Try out the use case

Let's test the use case by sending a request to the service.

#### Start the backend service

Download the JAR file for the [backend service](https://github.com/ballerina-guides/integration-tutorials/blob/main/backends/hospital-service/hospitalservice.jar), and execute the following command to start the service.

```bash
bal run hospitalservice.jar
```

#### Send a request

> Use [Try HTTP Service](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/try-the-services/try-http-services/) in the VS Code to send an HTTP request to the service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the [Try it](https://wso2.com/ballerina/vscode/docs/try-the-services/try-http-services/) feature to send a request to the service. Specify the port used in the service and use `surgery` as the path parameter.
```

Author: +1

> 

Reviewer 3: ^ broken now

### Step 3: Build and run the service

> ![Run the service](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/run_the_service.gif)

Reviewer 3: Org name seems to be dulaj, not integration_tutorials.

#### Send a request

> > **Note:** The healthcare service has to be running to send a request to it. If you have stopped the service, start it again.

Reviewer 3: Why do we need to mention this explicitly?

Author: We don't need it

>

> ![Send a request](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/try_it.gif)

Reviewer 3: Wrong org name here also.

1. Change `queryDoctorEP` initialization in the source code to use a separate function that can be mocked.

    Replace

    ```ballerina
    final http:Client queryDoctorEP = check new (healthcareBackend);
    ```

    with

    ```ballerina
    final http:Client queryDoctorEP = check initializeHttpClient();

    function initializeHttpClient() returns http:Client|error => new (healthcareBackend);
    ```

2. Introduce the tests in a `.bal` file within a directory named `tests` in the package. Import the `ballerina/test` module to use the Ballerina test framework and the `ballerina/http` module to use an `http:Client` client object to send requests to the implemented service and mock the backend service.

    ```ballerina
    import ballerina/http;
    import ballerina/test;
    ```

3. Create an http:Client to send requests to the healthcare service.

    ```ballerina
    final http:Client cl = check new (string `http://localhost:${port}/healthcare/doctors`);
    ```

> 4. Define a function to return the expected payload from the backend service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Define a function that returns the expected payload from the backend service. This function will be used to mock the payload from the backend and to verify the received payload.
```

Let's test the use case by writing a test case that sends a request to the service and validates the payload for a successful request. Testing is enabled by the [Ballerina test framework](https://ballerina.io/learn/test-ballerina-code/test-services-and-clients/).

1. Change `queryDoctorEP` initialization in the source code to use a separate function that can be mocked.

    Replace

    ```ballerina
    final http:Client queryDoctorEP = check new (healthcareBackend);
    ```

    with

    ```ballerina
    final http:Client queryDoctorEP = check initializeHttpClient();

    function initializeHttpClient() returns http:Client|error => new (healthcareBackend);
    ```

2. Introduce the tests in a `.bal` file within a directory named `tests` in the package. Import the `ballerina/test` module to use the Ballerina test framework and the `ballerina/http` module to use an `http:Client` client object to send requests to the implemented service and mock the backend service.

    ```ballerina
    import ballerina/http;
    import ballerina/test;

>     ```

Reviewer 3: I think we can remove this step like we did for the source.

Author: If we remove this, the user may get errors if he copies just the code snippets. One thing we can do here is give the full test code and explain it one by one. WDYT?

Reviewer 3: Similar concern for the source if they don't use the diagram view, right? I think we can just remove.

> 3. Create an http:Client to send requests to the healthcare service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Define an `http:Client` object to send requests to the healthcare service.
```

Let's test the use case by writing a test case that sends a request to the service and validates the payload for a successful request. Testing is enabled by the [Ballerina test framework](https://ballerina.io/learn/test-ballerina-code/test-services-and-clients/).

1. Change `queryDoctorEP` initialization in the source code to use a seperate function that can be mocked.

>     Replace this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Replace 
```

    ```ballerina
    final http:Client queryDoctorEP = check new (healthcareBackend);
    ```

    with

    ```ballerina
    final http:Client queryDoctorEP = check initializeHttpClient();

    function initializeHttpClient(string url) returns http:Client|error => new (healthcareBackend);
    ```

> 1. Introduce the tests in a `.bal` file within a directory named `tests` in the package. Import the `ballerina/test` module to use the Ballerina test framework and the `ballerina/http` module to use an `http:Client` client object to send requests to the implemented service and mock the backend service.

Reviewer 3: Numbers have to be updated.

Author: Good catch!

    }
    ```

7. Run the tests.

    ![Run the tests](/learn/images/integration-tutorials/sending-a-message-to-a-service/run_tests.gif)

>     Alternatively, you can run the tests from the terminal using the `bal test` command from the project root to run the tests.

Reviewer 3: "run the tests" is duplicated.

```suggestion
    Alternatively, you can run all the tests in a package by navigating to the project root and using the `bal test` command.
```
